.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii esxplot.man
.\" for ascii manpage output or, to produce html use
.\" rman -f html esxplot.man >esxplot.html
.\"
.TH ESXPLOT 1 "November 2009" Durga Networks "User Manuals"
.SH NAME
esxplot \- plot data from esxtop batch mode
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B esxplot[.py] 
.B [-d | -l 
.I logfile_path 
.B ]
.B [
.I data_file
.B ] 
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B esxplot
is a GUI application that lets you explore the data collected by 
.B esxtop
in batch mode. The program takes a
single command line argument which is the esxtop batch mode output file. 
You can also  simply start 
.B esxplot
without any arguments, and enter a dataset file via the 
.I File
attribute of
the menu bar. Esxplot loads the data in this file and presents the metrics as a hierarchical tree
where the values are selectable in the left panel. In the right panel, a graph is plotted (value over time)
of the selected metric, in this way, you can "browse" the contents of these somewhat unwieldy files.

Once you load a data set, the name of the machine will appear at the root node of a treectrl navigation widget at the lower left side of the tool. if you double-click on the name, all of the available categories of the metrics gathered for this machine will appear in an alphabetically sorted tree. Click on one of these branches to display the leaves. Clicking on a leaf activates the plot for that metric.  Nodes and Leaves that are "greyed out" can still be plotted but the greying is an indication to you that the values of these graphs will be zero allong the Y axis. Holding down the 
.I Ctrl
key while making a mouse selection will allow for multiple selections to be plotted, up to a maximum of sixteen.
Time based data is plotted in the large window on the right, the host name is present on the top of the graph, to the right of the graph there is a legend, with the name of the category and metric for each line plotted,  the legend can be abbreviated by changing a value in the 
.I preferences
dialogue panel. 
You can export the plots as a .jpg, ,png and .bmp.

.B Esxplot
allows you to zoom into a plot to examine elements of the plot at a fine level of granulation.  To do this, place the mouse in the plotting canvas, depress and hold left-button while you drag to describe a bounding rectangle encompassing the area of the plot that you want to examine more closely, when you release the left-button the graph is redrawn within the boundaries of the area that you inscribed. To zoom back out to baseline, double-click the left-button.

The application is constructed in such a way that the plotting area can be expanded and contracted along the left side of the plotting area. To do this, position the mouse over the boundary between the treecontrol/textcontrol area and the plotting canvas, approximately in the center, hold left-button down and drag to the right or the left to resize the plotting canvas.

The panel on the left contains a status text window where information and statistics will appear as esxplot goes about its work.  
This window is read-only.  
.B Esxplot 
prints messages upon start-up, when you load a dataset, and also when you select a metric for plotting, when the metric is selected, the Min, Max, and Mean values for the metric are printed in this window.  The window scrolls so no data is lost during your browsing session.  You can also copy data from this section to paste into other applications.

Beneath that, there is a  second text window which is writeable.  This window allows you to enter complex multi line regular expressions, which will be applied against the metric descriptions for the columns making up the treecontrol.  Pleae note that you must click the
.I GO
button in order to execute the query, ending the query by a carriage return will not cause the query to be executed as you are allowed to enter regular expressions that are several lines long.  If the query is valid and a result set is produced, the treecontrol is collapsed and another branch named Query:xxx is displayed where xxx are the first few characters of the query.  If the query is malformed or if there isn't a match, an Alert Dialogue is asserted, click OK and try a different query.
It should be possible to cut and paste complicated queries that you have previously used in
.B egrep
into this text area and hit the GO button and have them applied against the set of metric names found in the treecontrol. 
The results of the query, if it is successful, is another treecontrol branch that can be navigated in the same way.  Queries are always applied against the main branch and never against the result of previous queries.

.B Esxplot
has a single menu button, 
.I File.

Underneath this menu we have 
.I About,
.I Import,
.I Export,
.I Close,
.I Preferences,
.I Help
and
.I Exit

.B About
.RS
Displays general information about
.B esxplot
including version and license information.
.RE

.B Import->Dataset

.RS
The 
.I Dataset
submenu allows you to import data set into 
.B esxplot
to be processed.  These data sets are the output of the
.B esxtop
command run in batch mode (see the collecting data section below). A general file selection dialog box will appear which allows you to select a file for import.  There are no restrictions on file name or extension, but esxplot will do some basic checking to insure that it is actually a dump originating from esxtop that you are loading.
As of this release, you can only import a single data set per run of esxplot.
.RE

.B Import->Queries

.RS
You can read in queries that you have used and saved in previous runs of esxplot.  You can also craft canned queries and place them in a query file for use later.  The format of these files are rather straight forward and can be deduced easily by examining one.  Please note that this format could change in subsequent releases.
You can only import queries if you have a data set already imported. Queries that are imported from a saved queries file are immediately applied, one by one, against the metric fields in the data set loaded,  if a query fails to produce a result set, that query is essentially deleted.
.RE

.B Export->Graph

.RS
This submenu allows you to export the plot canvas to a file in a particular image format. Allowable formats are 
.I .bmp
.I .xbm
.I .xpm
.I .png 
and
.I .jpg 

To have the file exported in a particular format, simply tag the output file with the appropriate extension for the format that you wish to write to.
Note that the size of the resultant image file depends on the size of the canvas that esxplot is currently displaying, i.e. to get the maximum size plot, Maximize esxplot and slide the panel slider far to the left.
.RE

.B Export->Columns

.RS
You can also export a subset of column data with esxplot.  Basically the Export->Columns menu will export the metrics that are currently selected at the time that the menu is activated.  If you make selections that are plotted (up to 16) they will be exported to a CSV file. However this feature is more powerful then just selecting the plotted metrics.  Any branch of the treecontrol that is selected will be exported as a CSV file. If you select the top of the tree, then the entire tree is exported (not very useful). But this goes all the way to the result set of a query!
So, if you select the query that you just entered or imported and activate File->Export->Columns, then the results of that query will be exported to a CSV file that is suitable for reload into esxplot or other utilities such as PERFMON or Excel,  this is a quick way to cut up those esxtop output files that have over 100,000 columns!
.RE

.B Export->Queries

.RS
The final submenu under Export is the 
.B Queries
submenu.  This allows you to export all of your currently active queries to a file for later use.  Note that this feature exports the queries themselves, not the result sets of the queries.  To export the result sets, select the query and use the export columns feature. The file produced can be read in to load these queries during a latter run.
.RE

.B Right-Mouse-Down on  Selections
.RS
.I Right-Mouse-Down
on a selection made in the treectrl widget, brings up a context menu with two options,

.I delete, 
which will delete the particular branch of the treectrl that is selected.  This is primarily used to delete unwanted query result sets. You cannot delete single metrics or multiple selections using this feature, only entire data sets, or query result sets. Note that in order to load a new dataset, you must use the 
.B Close
menu item to close the Current Dataset.

.I export, 
which will bring up a file selection dialog box that will allow you to save your selctions to a csv file.  You can save multiple selections, as well as the entire result set of a query this way.
.RE
.B Close

.RS
This menu item currently has one element,
.I "Current Dataset".
Selecting this will close the current dataset, clear the navigation panel and graphic area.  You can now Import a new dataset into the tool. As you import larger datasets, the virtual address space of esxplot increases. However, if you unload a large dataset, the memory is garbage collected by python so opening a dataset that is smaller in size will not demand additional memory.
.RE

.B Preferences

.RS
This displays a panel with set-able parameters that control the way esxplot behaves.  For the 1.0 release there are not a lot of dials. You can set the width of the plot lines to either one pixel wide (the default) or to two pixels wide, which is sometime useful if you are creating a printed document.
The abbreviated legends check box, if checked, allows you to enter a two digit integer in the textbox to the right,
the number you enter here will be the rightmost number of characters displayed on the legends that are situated to the right of the graph area.  This box is not checked by default.

Finally you can set the colors of the lines that are used to plot the graphs, there are over 630 colors in the wxPython color database and you can select these by name, you can also enter an RGB value by prefixing the 6 digit hex value with a "#", so, for example "#0000FF" is pure blue, where as "#FF0000" is red.  
Pressing the 
.I "Reset to Default Colors"
Button will reload the default colors, just in case you changed them to something that you don't like.
When you click OK on the preferences panel the preferences take effect and the plot is redrawn with the new values.
.RE

.B Help
.RS
Your reading it :)
.RE
.B Exit

.RS
What more needs to be said?
.RE

.SH COLLECTING DATA

The simplest way to collect data is to run esxtop in batch mode and tell it to collect everything, to do this run the following command from the service console of your ESX host or from the vMA of your ESXi host:

.SM esxtop -a -b -n 120 > dataset.csv

This command will collect all metrics with a time interval of 5 seconds (the default) and take 120 samples (about 10 minutes). This resultant file is the target of an 
.I Import->Dataset
action. Use caution when you use the 
.B -a
switch to esxtop on a system with a large number of virtual machines, you could wind up with a file that has well over 50 to 100 thousand columns.  While esxplot can handle data sets this large, having to wade through all of that data makes response time sluggish, especially if your running it on a Microsoft Windows desktop. If this is the case, it may be better to run esxtop on the target system in interactive mode, select a subset of the areas that you are interested in, perform the "W" command to write out an "rc" file and use this file to run esxtop in batch mode as follows:

.SM esxtop -b -c esxtoprc -n 120 > dataset.csv

where esxtoprc is the name of the rc file that you saved during the interactive run.

.SH OPTIONS
.B -d
.RS
Run esxplot forcing all logging to 
.I stdout
and not to a log file
.RE
.B -l
.I logfile_path
.RS
Log to the specified logfile and not to the default location, (~/.esxplot/esxplot.log on *nix systems, \\Documents and Settings\\<user>\\Local Settings\\Application Data\\esxplot\\esxplot.log for Windows systems)
.RE
.I data_file
.RS
If you start esxplot from the command line, you can specify a filename that
will immediately be loaded upon when the application starts
.RE
.SH FILES
.I data_file
.RS
A file in excel "csv" format, typically originating from the output of
.B esxtop
in batch mode.
.RE
.I query_file
.RS
These files are produced by esxplot and contain queries that can be used when you run
.B esxplot
at a latter time.
.RE
.I image_file
.RS
.B Esxplot
can produce an image file of the plot in several formats, exporting the file with the appropriate extension will yeild an image file in that format.
.RE

.SH ENVIRONMENT
This program was written in Python 2.6, and needs the 
.I wxPython
library
.I 2.8.10
or greater,along with  the
.I numpy
library
.I 1.3.0
or greater. 
.I WxPython
allows you to write GUI programs that will run on *NIX, Windows and OSX without change.  If you are so lucky to have a
.I thinapp
or other type of installable for windows, you can just double-click on the icon and get going.

.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Alerts will appear if you've done something wrong.  Otherwise, if the application dies mysteriously, or
hangs, try looking in the logfile or console for a traceback. 
Send the traceback to <geoffw at durganetworks dot com>

.SH BUGS
Report all bugs, misfeatures, and feature requests to the author.

.SH AUTHOR
Geoff White <geoffw at durganetworks dot com>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
esxtop (1)

There is also an excellent whitepaper on interpreting esxtop statistics  at...

http://communities.vmware.com/docs/DOC-9279

